---
title: "Sharing a speculative news in social network"
date: 2025-01-16
categories: ["social"]
short_summary: "I want to advise me and all my Muslim brothers and sisters to be cautious while sharing"
long_summary: "I want to advise me and all my Muslim brothers and sisters to be cautious while sharing a news link in the social networks. If you are sharing news of an accident or an established incident"
---

I want to advise me and all my Muslim brothers and sisters to be cautious while sharing a news link in the social networks. If you are sharing news of an accident or an established incident, it is okay to make others aware; although we should think twice if sharing news in the social networks is a justified usage of time in the social networks. But, when we are sharing speculative news; e.g. "Is so and so involved in this killing?". "Is the issue a conspiracy?". I think we all know very well that we should not share and spread anything we hear which makes us  'a liar' as per Muhammad SW. I see numerous practicing Muslims sharing stories in social network which include

- Spiritual speech from a woman or a Kaafir, promoting Hijabless women and the Kuffar's ideology.
- Rumor type of news from different online newspapers. Do we really fear Allaah or just roam around on the internet to share news and have fun to see comments.
- Emotional advertise which promotes gender equality
- Posting pictures of oneself along with other women just to share with the world the completion of PhD. There might be other cases as well. I request all of you to be more cautious about this. We need to justify this in front of Allaah. Just do not go ahead sharing anything you like. May Allaah protect us. 

Abu Aaisha
